# Setting up your dev environment with Git and Conda

*⚠️ This tutorial assumes you’re working in a Linux-based development environment, which could be a native Linux machine, WSL on Windows, or a remote Linux server accessed via SSH.*

When you're diving into development, having the right tools for version control and environment management is essential. Git and Conda are two such tools that have become industry standards, helping you streamline your workflow and ensure your code is well-managed and reproducible across different environments.

## Git

### 0. Introduction

**What is Git?**

Git is a distributed version control system (VCS). It allows multiple people to collaborate on a project, track changes to files, and manage different versions of a project over time. Version control helps developers avoid the common issue of losing code or working on outdated versions of a project. Git tracks changes in files, allows you to roll back to previous versions, and lets multiple developers work on the same project simultaneously without stepping on each other’s toes.

Git is primarily used in software development, but it can be applied to any kind of project where multiple versions need to be managed over time. It's incredibly popular because it's fast, efficient, and can be used locally without needing an internet connection, unlike some other version control systems.

**What is Version Control?**

Version control is the process of managing changes to documents, code, or other collections of files. A version control system keeps track of every change made to your files, which allows you to:

- **Track changes**: View the history of your project.
- **Collaborate with others**: Work on the same project without overwriting each other’s work.
- **Revert to previous versions**: Roll back your work if something goes wrong.
- **Branch out and experiment**: Create isolated versions of your project to try out new ideas without affecting the main codebase.

*If you're new to Git, feel free to check out this [other tutorial](https://coderefinery.github.io/research-software-engineering/version-control/) or the [official Git documentation](https://git-scm.com/) for more detailed information.*

### 1. Checking your installation

Since you're on Linux, Git is likely already installed. To check if Git is installed, you can run:

```bash
git --version
```

### 2. Setting up your Git configuration

Even if git is already installed, you still need to configure your global settings. To set up your Git username and email, run the following commands:

```bash
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "your.email@example.com"
```

**⚠️ Tip:**

Even when working on private repositories, it's a good habit to use an anonymous email instead of your personal one. You can follow [these instructions](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/setting-up-and-managing-your-personal-account-on-github/managing-email-preferences/setting-your-commit-email-address) to get one associated with your GitHub account.

*There are more global setting you can configure, but those two are the mandatory ones.*

## Conda

### 0. Introduction

**What is Conda?**

Conda is an open-source and cross-plateform package management and environment management system that allows users to easily manage dependencies, libraries, and environments for various software projects. It simplifies the process of installing, updating, and managing software packages and environments, particularly in Python, but it can be used with other languages like R, Ruby, and more.

**Key Concepts:**

- **Environment**: An isolated space where you can install specific versions of Python and packages. This helps avoid conflicts between dependencies used in different projects (or parts of a same project).

- **Package**: A software library or tool that you install into an environment.

- **Channel**: A source from which Conda can automatically fetch packages. The default channel is the main Conda repository, but there are additional channels like `conda-forge` or `bioconda` that provide access to a larger variety of packages.

- **Active Environment**: The environment that you are currently working in. You can switch between environments depending on the needs of your project.

**Best practices:**

- To maintain consistency and reproducibility across systems and collaborators, always define your Conda environment by listing your project dependancies in a `.yml` file. This file should, ideally, also specify the Python and packages **versions** your project needs, allowing you to recreate the exact same environment on any system.

- When adding new dependencies, update the `.yml` file rather than manually installing packages. This helps maintain a consistent development environment, which is crucial for collaboration.

- Try to keep this file as fine-grained as possible by only including the dependencies your project truly requires. This minimizes unnecessary complexity and makes the environment easier to manage.

- You can also list channels in the `.yml` file, but be sure to limit the list to the ones you need, to prevent potential conflicts.

- Regularly test and update your environment to stay aligned with the latest package versions and security patches.

**About Mamba:**

Mamba is a fast, drop-in replacement for Conda that significantly speeds up package management and environment creation. It uses a more efficient dependency resolver, which helps reduce the time it takes to install and update packages, particularly in larger environments. Mamba offers the same functionality as Conda, meaning you can still use the same commands and manage the same environments, but with improved performance, making it a great option for users who need faster package installations or work with complex environments.

### 1. Installation

*⚠️ These instructions are intended for installing conda (or Mamba) in your personnal linux environment. To use conda in a shared environment, ask your system administrator about potential environment management policies before running any of these steps.*

1. **Download and Install Conda or Mamba**  
   Choose one of the following options based on your preference:
   - [Download Mamba Installer](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge/releases/latest)
   - [Download Miniconda Installer](https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh)

2. **Run the Installer**  
   Open your terminal and execute the following command (adjust if you are using Mamba):
   ```bash
   bash ~/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh  # or the equivalent for Mamba
   ```
   Follow the on-screen instructions: Agree to the terms & conditions, confirm the install location, and get conda initialized.

3. **Restart Your Terminal**  
   After the installation finishes, restart your terminal to ensure the changes take effect.

4. **Verify Installation**  
   Test your installation by running:
   ```bash
   conda --version  # or mamba --version if you installed Mamba
   ```
   You should see the version number if it was successful.

   You may also notice that your terminal prompt now includes a `(base)` prefix (e.g., `(base) user@hostname:~$`). This indicates that the base Conda environment is activated by default.

   **⚠️Warning:**
   
   As a best practice, you should avoid working in the `base` environment to prevent potential conflicts or issues. Instead, try to always create and activate separate environments for your projects.

### 2. Usage

**Creating a New Environment**

- To create a new environment with Conda, you can use the following command:
   ```bash
   conda create --name myenv python=3.8
   ```
   This command creates an environment named `myenv` and installs Python version `3.8`.

- Alternatively, you can create an environment from a `.yml` file:
   ```bash
   conda env create --file environment.yml
   ```

**Activating and Deactivating an Environment**

- To begin working in a specific environment, activate it with:
   ```bash
   conda activate myenv
   ```
   Once activated, any installations, updates, or modifications will apply to this isolated environment.

- To exit the environment and return to the `base` environment (or to exit the `base` envirnment), use:
   ```bash
   conda deactivate
   ```

**Listing your Environments**

- To see a list of all the environments on your system, use the following command:
   ```bash
   conda env list
   ```
   This will display all the environments, including their locations, and mark the currently active environment with an asterisk (*).

**Removing an Environment**

- If you no longer need an environment, you can remove it with:
   ```bash
   conda remove --name myenv --all
   ```
   This command will delete the `myenv` environment and all of its installed packages.

These are the most basic commands you need to know for working with conda. Should you want to learn more about conda usage, feel free to explore [any](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/_downloads/843d9e0198f2a193a3484886fa28163c/conda-cheatsheet.pdf) [of](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/4.6.0/_downloads/52a95608c49671267e40c689e0bc00ca/conda-cheatsheet.pdf) [those](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html) resources .

## Practical Case: Starting with a new Project

1. **Create or Access a GitHub Repository**  
   - If you don’t have a repository, create one for your group.
   - If you're working on an existing repository, access it on GitHub and find the URL (use the green "Code" button).

2. **Clone the Repository**  
   Be mindful of where you clone the repository, as it will be downloaded to your current location. Make sure to navigate to the desired directory before running the clone command.

   To clone the repository, including any submodules, use the following command:
   ```
   git clone --recurse-submodules <repository-url>
   ```

3. **Set Up Dependencies**  
   Create and/or activate a dedicated conda environment for the project. Once inside the environment, you can install any required dependencies:
   - If the project provides an `environment.yml` file, run:
     ```
     conda env create -f environment.yml
     ```
   - If using a `requirements.txt` file, first activate your conda environment and then install the dependencies:
     ```
     conda activate <env-name>
     pip install -r requirements.txt
     ```

4. **You're ready to go!**  
   Once the environment is set up, you can start working on your project.
   
   *⚠️ If your work involves using graphical interfaces (typically, running Python Notebooks from VS Code), you might have to pay some extra care to which environment each software is using.*
