## Setting Up Conda/Mamba

From now on, all steps can be performed directly within VS Code.

1. **Download and Install Conda or Mamba**  
   Choose one of the following options based on your preference:
   - [Download Mamba Installer](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge/releases/latest)
   - [Download Miniconda Installer](https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh)

2. **Run the Installer**  
   Open your terminal and execute the following command (adjust if you are using Mamba):
   ```
   bash ~/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh  # or the equivalent for Mamba
   ```

3. **Agree to the Terms**  
   Follow the on-screen instructions and agree to all prompts.

4. **Restart Your Terminal**  
   After the installation finishes, restart your terminal to ensure the changes take effect.

5. **Verify Installation**  
   Test your installation by running:
   ```
   conda --version  # or mamba --version if you installed Mamba
   ```
   You should see the version number if it was successful.


## Starting Your Project

1. **Create or Access a GitHub Repository**  
   - If you don’t have a repository, create one for your group.
   - If you're working on an existing repository, access it on GitHub and find the URL (use the green "Code" button).

2. **Clone the Repository**  
   Be mindful of where you clone the repository, as it will be downloaded to your current location. Make sure to navigate to the desired directory before running the clone command.

   To clone the repository, including any submodules, use the following command:
   ```
   git clone --recurse-submodules <repository-url>
   ```

3. **Set Up Dependencies**  
   Create and activate a dedicated conda environment for the project. Once inside the environment, you can install any required dependencies:
   - If the project provides an `environment.yml` file, run:
     ```
     conda env create -f environment.yml
     ```
   - If using a `requirements.txt` file, first activate your conda environment and then install the dependencies:
     ```
     conda activate <env-name>
     pip install -r requirements.txt
     ```

4. **Start Working!**  
   Once the environment is set up, you can start working on your project directly within VS Code.
